But the queen, long since smitten with
a wound in her veins and to the blind, she is consumed by the fire.
the virtue of many a recurs to the mind of a man
of the people command respect; they're fitted with the breast of the face
and the formula used, nor withholds calm rest from her limbs.       5
following the lamp of Phoebus lands
from the sky the dewy shades,
and thus speaks to a healthy sister,
Anna sister, who dreams thrill me scare!
Who is this new guest to approach our seats,                10
that hath entered in his appearance, and how brave in heart and in arms!
I believe, indeed, that it is no empty faith, that his race is of the gods.
you have fallen away the minds of the fear of the convicts. Alas, by what he
waving spoken! What exhaustive wars!
if you do not mind, fixed and immovable in                15
they were assigned to me, she tied a wish to unite myself the yoke of marriage,
after my first love deceived me by death;
if they do not they disgust me of one little chamber torch had not,
I swear, I could perhaps become a fault.
(Death) poor Sychaeus                20
and the shattering brother's murder
alone has swayed wavering mind
pushed. I recognize the traces of the ancient flame.
but may earth yawn for me, that the bottom of the cervix
or the Almighty Father hurl me with his bolt to the shades,           25
plucks pale shadows of Hades and profound night,
before, or I relax your laws.
He, who first joined me to himself, who, for the loves
hath taken away; and let him preserve it in the tomb. '
So saying, she filled tears.               30

Anna replied: "O you are cherished more than the light of his sister, where
, lonely and sad, going to youth
, or my sweet children nor the rewards of Venus?
the shades of the dead can be, or do you think that that ashes?
So be it: no wooers,                35
are not in Libya, not before Tire; Iarbas and
the other leaders, whom the African land of the triumphs of
the rich man-hap, will you wrestle also with a love?
Nor does she come to mind in whose land you have settled?
on the one side of the Gaetulian cities, a race unconquerable in war,                40
and the unbridled Numidians, and the unfriendly Syrtis;
here deserted because of drought widely ranging
Barcaens. but what of war rising in Tire and I will say to
threats of your brother?
I certainly push and Juno's second                45
course Trojan ships held.
What a city, my sister, what a realm
such a marriage! The arms of the Trojans, and accompanied by
a Carthaginian To what heights will Punic glory soar?
You can ask the gods, with sacrifice duly                50
hospitality and reasons for delaying,
while winter rages and Orion is
shattered, while the sky is not favorable. "

With these words she inflamed her mind with a vast love
and she gave hope to her wavering mind, and loosed the sense of shame.               55
to the temples and sue for peace at the shrine,
and courage; slay chosen sheep to
Ceres, Apollo and father,
Juno before all the bonds of marriage.
She holds up the right hand most beautiful Dido,                60
, pours libation midway between the horns,
or walks to the rich altars, before the faces of the gods,
and she renews the day with gifts, animals having been opened
she looking down consults the quivering entrails.
Alas, ignorant minds! what avail are vows,                65
, how do shrines help her? while the flame
and the secret lives within the heart.
Unhappy Dido burns, and she wandered
the city, raving, just as a deer with an arrow,
which, all unwary, amid the Cretan                70
is the shepherd of driving with weapons, leaving in her the winged steel
, unknowing: she in flight ranges the woods and glades
of Artemis; clings the deadly shaft.
now the middle of the leads Aeneas with her along the walls,
and shows the Sidonian wealth and the city is ready to be,                75
starts to speak, stops with the word;
now she seeks the banquet,
again madly to labor
again hangs from the mouth.
After the left and turn the dark               80
moon falling stars suggest sleep,
only the empty house she couch having
reclines. She, being absent, and listens, and sees him,
or in the bosom of the father she holds Ascanius on her lap
under arrest, if she could deceive her unspeakable love.               85
does not longer rise the towers begun, no arms, the youth of
exercises havens or bulwarks for safety in war,
safe from war: the works are broken and the huge threatening
walls and the machines heaven.

How to be bound by such a plague at the same time, and the                90
dear to Jove 's reputation did not stand in the way to his anger,
with such Saturn accosts Venus thus:
' Splendid indeed is the praise and ample spoils,
you and your boy (a great and memorable power),
the deceit of the gods one woman is conquered by the other two things.               95
and deceived me so much of our city
suspicion the homes of high Carthage.
But what will be, or how much the contest now?
but rather an enduring peace and a plighted wedlock
we are exercising? All the ideas we have requested                100
on fire and dragged through her bones.
this people with equal power
guidance; allowed to serve a Trojan husband
and yield her Tyrians to. "

Girl (she was a false mind, she spoke with                105
Italian kingdom Libyan shores)
as Venus: 'Who is this mad
or prefer to strive?
if only fortune should follow the deeds which you mention.
but as uncertain by the fates, whether Jupiter would                110
there to be one city for the Tyrians wanderers from Troy,
or approves the blending peoples and the league to be joined.
Your spouse, your right mind by praying.
Proceed to follow. " Then queenly Juno
'This work will be. now how to speed          115
could be a few (Note) symptoms.
Aeneas and unhappy Dido
prepare to go into the woods, where the chief men of the risings and
has carried them out his rays unveils the world at peace.
On them, a black rain mingled with hail,,                120
while the wings are fluttering and surround the forest,
from above and I thunder, the whole sky with thunder.
The comrades will be covered with dark night,
the leader Dido and the Trojan
cave. I will be there and, if it is certain to                125
stable marriage torch.
This will be a wedding. " not in opposition to the request
, he nodded assent, and smiled at the guile, Venus.

Dawn of the Ocean in the mean time he got up and left.
the youth of the gates the the widely spaced raised, the chosen,                130
meshed nets, snares, spears with broad iron,
and the African horses rush out and the smelly dogs want to go.
hesitating at the threshold of the chamber, the first queen
of the Carthaginians, they wait, and the gold of her prancing
steed stands brilliant and fiercely champs the foaming bit.               135
At last a large crowd
Sidonian robe border;
to whom the quiver of gold, her tresses are knotted into gold, a
gold pin fastens her purple garment.
the Phrygian comrades and happy with mature as well as the                140
are bent over. He is in front of others, most handsome,
presented himself as a comrade and he joins the battle lines.
such as when Apollo leaves wintry Lycia and the streams
of Xanthus and he visits maternal Delos Apollo,
and she renews his choruses, and around the altars around the                145
Cretans and the Dryopes and roar mixed;
he walks on the ridges or soft, flowing with
he presses his lock of hair fixing it and he entwines it with gold,
weapons resound on his shoulders: so no less lightly than he went
Aeneas, such beauty shines forth of his mouth.                150
When they came to the mountain and impassable pools,
wild dislodged from a goat
down the ridges; the other side, stags
cross the open plains and the columns of a deer,
dusty in flight, and leave the mountains.        155
But in the midst of the valleys the young Ascanius comes to
rejoice in his horse, galloping past now these, now those, and
foaming the wishes of the timorous herds a
foaming boar or a tawny lion descend from the mountain.

Meanwhile, a great rumbling sky                160
starts, mixed with hail,
Tyrian train and the Trojan
grandson Venus, in the fields of
buildings in fear; plunge from the heights.
The leader Dido and the Trojan                165
arrive. the first and the Earth and nuptial Juno
give the sign; fires and the sky
Nymphs from the Nymphs.
That day was cause of all her ills
was the reason why; is moved by appearance or reputation, nor for the                170
and is no longer a secret of their secret love:
she called it, and with that the name of the guilt is concerned.

Mother Earth against the gods , so they say, airshe foot and nimble wings,                180 
terrible monster and huge number of feathers on many watchful eyes below (amazing to say), many languages, so many mouths are so many listening ear. through the shadow of the night, she flies in the midst of the earth's land screeching, and droops not her eyes in sweet sleep;               185












Light sits on guard on high roof
on high towers and big cities,
such clinging to tell the truth.
the people with manifold gossip, she filled in by this latter
, rejoicing, and he sang alike of fact and falsehood,:                190
Aeneas had come from Trojan blood, came,
whom in marriage fair Dido deigns to join;
now they spend the winter, how long it was,
kingdoms and shameful desire.
Here the loathsome spreads edge.               195
at once to the king of Iarbas she
fires his spirit and heaps high their wrath.

Hammon floors Garamantian nymph
temples to Jupiter broad realms a hundred,
a hundred altars wakeful fire,          200
sentry of the gods' eternal blood of cattle
and soil rich variety of flower garlands.
Distraught in mind and fired a bitter
called altar amid the divine
many Zeus upturned hands,                205
'Jove, who now Moorish
race, feasting Lynaean honor,
you see this? Or, father, when you hurl
vain, and do fires in the clouds
terrify our minds and empty sounds?               210
a woman who, straying in the borders of the city,
for a price, and to whom you must plow the shore of the
laws of the place of tenure, hath spurned my
he put away the leader and lord of Aeneas into her realm.
And now that Paris with his company,                 215
chin and propping
cap, grasps, we present the temples
Since we cherish an idle story. '

With such words and tending
Almighty eyes on the walls funnel                220
royal and ignoring better reputation.
Then thus to Mercury he speaks and gives this charge:
'Go forth, my son, call the Zephyrs, glide on your wings and
to the Dardan chief, who now in Tyrian Carthage and
is waiting for the fates, and heeds not the cities,                225
, be swift and carry my words through the swift air.
had not made it such a lovely mother to us
, promised for this twice rescue him from Grecian arms;
But that he might teeming with empire and
rule Italy, a race from the deep, from the blood of Teucer                230
, and bring all the world beneath his laws.
if there is no glory of such a fortune fires of things,
He shall not make himself, of his fame 's hard work,
the father deny the Roman citadels?
what is he doing? Or rather, what the hope of a hostile people and pays                235
no heed to Ausonia and the Lavinian fields?
sail on! It is essential here is the message from me. '

He said. he was preparing to obey his mighty father's
command; and the first he binds the
golden shoes which carry him aloft on the wings of or above the sea                240
or the land, swift as the gale carry with them.
Then he takes his wand, wherewith he takes the bough
pale ghosts others down to gloomy Tartarus,
gives and takes away sleep, and the eyes in death.
Relying on the stormy winds                245
mph. and then flying he saw the peak and the sides of the steep flanks
of Atlas who supports the sky the top of the props,
of Atlas, to whom the dark clouds and is constantly surrounded by
the pine-bearing head, and he is struck by the wind and the rain and
snow mantles his shoulders, while rivers plunge                250
the old man, and a rough beard is stiff with ice.
here for the first time things being equal, poising wing
of their state, on the one side himself with his whole body to the waves
like a bird, which are round about the shores, around
the fishy cliffs, flies low near to the waters.               255
just between earth and sky flew
to the sandy shore of Libya, and cut the winds
coming from his mother's sire.
As soon as he touched the huts, he
saw Aeneas building citadels and renewing the houses                260
catches sight of the. and to him they starred with yellow jasper, and
his sword was starred with ablaze with Tyrian purple cloak having been
sent down from his shoulders, gifts which wealthy Dido
with fine threads of gold.
wasted no time: "You now Carthage,                265
foundations fair city
person? Alas, the ruler of
the god who 'tis for me down from bright Olympus
king, for they, who turns the sky and the lands,
he is to carry these orders through the quick winds:                270
What are you planning? Or rather, what hope dost thou waste in Libyan lands?
If you are not the fame of
[or for your own praise,]
Ascanian the hopes of Law
, to whom the kingdom of Italy and the Roman land                275
alone. ' Cyllenian mouth
human vision in the middle of his speech
and far off he vanished from their eyes into thin air.

But, in truth Aeneas stood speechless,
stood on end with horror of my hair, and my voice stuck in my throat.     280
burns to flee pleasant land,
dazed by that warning of the gods.
Alas, what shall I do? I now raging queen
dare he? What opening employ?
His thoughts moved swiftly now here, now there, now                285
, in snatches in different parts and he turns through everything.
this seemed the better counsel hath it been seen:
Mnetheus, Sergestus, and he calls them make ready
the fleet in silence, gather the crews to the shore, they should
prepare the arms and conceal what is the reason for the change                290
may disguise; he himself, meanwhile, since finest Dido,
does not know and does not expect that so many loves,
test the approaches and what is the mildest
seasons, by these things, the right manner. at once all
gladly obey his command swiftly.               295

But the queen (can deceive a lover?)
, Grasps the future
, all safe. the same wicked Rumor brought her the maddening
And he brought the fleet was being armed and the course was ready for sailing.
raged and raved dashed round the city and                300
, like excited sacred
frenzy when she hears the biennial
at night Cithaeron.
at length by these thus accosts Aeneas first:
'turn a blind eye so you hoped to me, faithless one, only,                305
to be able to, and silent to depart from my land?
Does not our love or your right hand once given,
nor the doom of a cruel death for Dido?
Even without a wintry fleet
and hurry to go to sea                310
cruel? what would happen if you were not seeking foreign fields and
unknown homes, and if ancient Troy,
Troy be sought through the wavy sea?
seas? By these tears and your right hand
(since naught else, alas, have I myself left behind),                315
by means of our marriage, id mattis leo velit,
if I said what is true about you, I have earned, or if there was nothing
sweet about me, have mercy on the house that is falling, and that this,
I pray you, if you one for prayers, change your mind.
You, the Libyan Nomads                320
hate me, Tire; because of the same
have been extinguished by my honor and that by which alone the stars, my,
in former days. to Guest
(This is only the name of husband)?
why do I delay? as long as the walls of the brother of my brother Pygmalion, or                325
, overthrow this city, or the capture of the Gaetulian Iarbas lead?
at least if any offspring had been conceived by me from you
before your flight, if a man would get me a child, the court of
Aeneas were playing, who are you in the face and told it to,
would not seem altogether captured and deserted. '               330

He said. He held his warnings
lights and care under his heart.
at length I said a few things: "I gave you, very many things which
were able to enumerate, never, my Queen, I will also deny
that you are deserving, And my memory of Elissa,                335
as long as I can remember my father, when a spirit rules these limbs.
for the matter I will say. and I do not hope to hide this by stealth,
I put my trust (do not imagine it) to flight, nor have I ever held
the torches of or come into these agreements.
If the fates allow me to lead my life                340
and help settle my care,
the city of Troy and the sweet
relics, s high stay;
, and with my hand I would have set up the conquered.
but now of great Italy has Grynean Apollo, and                345
to Italy and a city of Lycia have ordered me into corners:
This is love, this is my country. If the towers of Carthage and
a Phoenician woman the sight of Libyan side of the city,
which, would inevitably Trojans to rest in the land of
their envy, is it? we must foreign kingdoms.               350
my father Anchises often humid shades
night veils the earth, the stars often arise
in my dreams and terror;
But the boy Ascanius and the wrong to me, my dear,
whom I am cheating of a Hesperian kingdom and predestined lands.               355
now that the gods sent from Jove himself
(I swear head) through the quick winds
reported that God obviously saw the light
of day come within our walls and these ears.
Stop inflaming me, and you with your complaints;               360
Italy will not follow. "

Saying such things for a long time now turned away she watched
it this way and rolling his eyes, and having
his eyes then thus, inflamed, cries out:
'Do not think it Dardan's parent nor the author of the goddess,                365
line, but rugged, bristling with crags begot you,
the Caucasus tigers moved the breasts of the tigers.
for the greater wrongs do I hold myself why do I pretend?
Surely weeping did? whether to bend?
as to whether he yield and the tears of her who loved him or pity her?               370
What next? Clearly now neither greatest Juno
nor the Saturnian sire looks on these things with.
Nowhere is faith. castaway on the shore, the poor,
I welcomed him and madly gave him a share of my throne.
lost fleet allies from death                375
(alas I carried off!): now prophetic Apollo,
now the messenger, now sent by Jove that
brings horrible through the air.
this is work to care for quiet
puzzles. nor do I hold not refute your words:                380
go, seek Italy on the winds, seek your kingdom through the waves.
I trust, if the higher powers can
prayers on the rocks and her
often call. I will follow with black fires in his absence
, and, since the death of the soul is separated your body from the cold,                385
in all places as I will be here. give penalties, cruel.
hear and this will come to the depths. "
these mid-air speech midway
herself away from his eyes and turning away,
leaving him in fear lingers for preparing                390
to say. Her slaves swooning
marble bedroom loft.

But pious Aeneas, although he to soothe and
to console her with what was said to turn away the cares with words,
groaning much and weakened in his mind the love of                395
the commands of the gods, however, to his fleet.
Then, indeed, they launch the Trojans on the shore of the
ships on the whole of the ship. The greased prow floats,
and they carry leafy oars and oak from the forest
of eagerness for the flight.                                                            400
of a migrating and rushing from the whole city:
And just as when the ants are a heap of of the crushed
when they store it in their, mindful of winter,
the black battle line goes through the grass
on a narrow path; part push                405
the huge grain, to the arms, a part of the armies of the constrain
and punish delays, the whole path is busy with work.
What was your sense then, Dido, discerning such things,
and what groans, beach aglow far and
look out upon the castle, from the Most High, seeing that the whole                410
was mixed before your very eyes with such an uproar!
dishonest, love, what do you not drive the hearts of men!
to go again into tears, once more assail him with prayer,
is constrained, and humbly to submit to love,
lest she leave anything untried to death in vain.               415

"Anna, you see all around the shore,
all sides; already the canvas,
and the merry sailors crown.
the pain of this, I can only hope that if I was able,
to bear it, sister, I shall be able. Yet this, however, one                420
Nevertheless, Anna, to me; only that traitor
to his hidden even your thoughts,
only easy access to suitable times.
i love, my sister, and to address the proud enemy as a suppliant:
yet not I, with the Greeks at the Trojan race;                425
at Aulis to have sent a fleet to Pergamus,
nor the Father, of Anchises and the ashes and disturbed:
why do you take back my words in his harsh ears?
This, the the last boon, let him give a gift to a lover:
Let him expect an easy flight and favorable winds.               430
is no longer the old marriage, which he has betrayed me, I pray,
and not give up fair Latium and resign his realm:
I seek empty time, a rest and a space for madness,
while my fortune teaches me, conquered, to grieve.
I beg for pardon (mercy sister),                435
, which I shall give heaped death. "

He prayed with, and the most wretched tears,
she reported her sister. but he is moved by
tears nor does any voices as a gentle person;
the fate of the obstacles and the god ears.               440
and just as strong with oak
blasts now here now there
strive among themselves; The noise and high
low on the ground the trunk was shattered;
the tree clings to the rocks and to the air, as far as the top of the                445
air so it tends to Tartarus, and the root:
not at all otherwise the one side and on this side, the voices of the hero
is beaten, and he feels cares in his heart;
mind tears roll down.

Then, indeed, her doom, luckless Dido                               450
prays for death; weary of gazing.
how to fulfill her leave,
saw ablaze with gifts on the altars
(horrible to say) holy water darken
inert wine into loathsome gore               455
is seen to none, not even her sister.
In addition to the palace a marble chapel
to her former in a wonderful honor and worship,
snowy fleeces and festal foliage
here and speech as heard on                               460
of her husband, whenever darkling night held,
alone on the roof boding song Owl
I often complain and start to wail;
And many more bards Prior
to the terrible warning of horrificant. He Himself does his rage with                465
in the sleep fierce Aeneas, and will always be left to their
claim exclusively for itself, it is always a long, unaccompanied, it seems
to go the way of the, and seeking her Tyrians in a land,
and the Furies' even as raving sees Pentheus
, and a double sun and twofold Thebes rise to view,                470
, or when Agamemnon's son, Orestes, hounded,
is armed with brands mother and black serpents
had escaped avenging sitting in the doorway crouch.

So, when a crouch avenging Fiends
And he gave orders to die, the time that it proceeds by itself the means of procuring                475
requires this, and her sorrowful sister of Octavius attacked
the plan covers, and the hope of the front of the face brightens:
'I have found the genuine service to, the way of the (wish your sister)
which is to return him to me or release me and her lover.
Near Ocean sun lies                               480
final Ethiopia is a place where the famous Atlas
on his shoulders the sphere,
here I Massyla of the tribe priest,
the West warden meals a dragon
that guarded the sacred tree branches and                485
sprinkling dewy honey and slumberous poppies.
He promises to pay to the songs of the minds of all this however
she wishes, but to bring hard, he let loose and cares, and
to make the water, by the rivers, and to turn back the heavenly bodies,
and night with moves the Manes: moan, and you will see the                490
under the feet of the mountains, to descend to the earth, and the mountains.
dear sister, the gods will take, and your
dear life, magic arts.
You bonfire inner secrets, in turn
, set up and armed men left her room which was suspended                495
wicked and all his bed,
undoing the obligation abhorred
all the monuments like the priestess. "
Thus having spoken, she is silent, a pallor at the same time takes possession of the mouths of men.
Anna thinks, however, does not pretend to the office these strange rites;                500
the authentic and believes that neither so many the mind of the fury of the
woman with child, or fears she aught worse than with the death Sychaeus died.
then ordered a pizza.

But the queen, in the seat of a fire and its holy place, under the air,
erect with pine logs and hewn ilex,                               505
hangs the place with garlands and festoons it
with funeral on the couch, and she left
image, knowing places the future.
hair the priest to stand altars around
three hundred gods, and Chaos,                510
threefold Hecate, three maiden Diana.
had sprinkled, feigned to spring of Avernus,
pruning hooks, by moonlight, moonlight with brazen sickles, and
juicy grasses oozing with milk of black venom;
is in question and of the nascent bud when horses brought out of the front of the                515
, and the love of his mother, he was snatched away.
the next meal and holy hands
and one foot unsandalled the loosened
she die gods and fate
stars; then if there is that it is not over lovers unequally allied                520
whatever power, righteous and mindful, he prays.

It was night, and the peaceful slumber with the feebleness of a deep sleep,
the bodies on land, in the woods and wild
seas, that are shed in the midst of the stars, with the fall,
when all the land, and flocks, and painted birds,                525
the limpid lakes hardships of fortune, bushes, with
their fold, are couched in sleep beneath the silent night.
[lenibant care heart forgetful snacks.]
but not so the soul, Phoenician, and never
sinks to sleep eyes or heart                530
receives redoubled care and once again
, love is shifting tide surges afresh.
It alone revolves her thoughts:
"Look, what do I do? I once wooers
I'll try, the Nomads should I ask for marriage with Numidians,                535
whom I have scorned so often as husbands?
And most extreme of the Trojans, the Trojan fleet, therefore,
were ordered to, I will follow? are grateful for aid before the relieved from worry
, and receive the grace of kindness stands firm in mindful hearts?
And what you do want haughty ships                540
hated on those? oh do not know, lost, yet
Lao feel race?
what then? flight crews accompany the cheers?
surrounded by all my Tyrian band, or
pursue, and, the city is scarce tear from the Sidonian, whom,                               545
on the other hand to give them unfurl their sails to the winds and the sea, am I to do?
Nay, die as you deserve, and with the sword, and turn away the pain.
Won over by my tears, thou, you were the first the madness of
these will be a real, ills, and drive me on to the enemy.
did not permit that, apart from a blameless life, of one little chamber                550
to live like some wild creature is, such is nor cares!
Faith ashes of Sychaeus not saved. "

This enumeration of those goods in his vessel's getting:
Aeneas, had already decided to make contact with the high in the stern,
was snatching sleep on these matters I am duly ordered.                              555
to another form of expression that returns the same
presented in dreams again, it seemed to warn that
Mercury is like the voice of a beautiful complexion
and hair graceful limbs youth:
"goddess can do under the still slumber                560
and you not stand up then the dangers you see, is
mad, but he will not hear the kindly breezes blowing?
the former revolves in her craft and crime,
resolved on death, and many a different her anger and gave the alarm to the heat. '
Do you not flee hence in haste, while hasty flight is possible?               565
This sea was disturbed by a welter of timbers, see fierce
brands ablaze, and the shore flashing with flames,
if the dawn finds you lingering in these lands.
UP THEN, delays. variable and changeable always a
woman. ' So saying, he melted into the black.               570

Then, indeed Aeneas, scared by the sudden vision, tears
himself from sleep and the body of his comrades
you order it: ', awake and man the benches!
Unfurl the sails flash. a god sent from high heaven
to hasten our flight and cut the twisted rope is                575
here he is again wishes above. follow thee, holy gods,
whoever you are, again, joyfulness.
Oh, gracious aid, and in the sky
right game. " He said sheath snatches his
flashing sword and hawsers.               580
the same zeal catches all at the same time, hurry and scurry
the shore, lies under the sea,
to spread the foam and the blue waters.

And now the new light sprinkling lands
Tithonus'saffron leaving the couch.               585
Queen tower as the first white light
he saw and the fleet move you wish,
shores and felt empty without crews and ports,
three and four hand fitting breast stroke
and tearing your hair 'Jupiter! go                590
here, "he said," and our realm a laughingstock?
not weapons, speed, and pursue from all the city,
diripientque the ships from the docks? Go,
fetch fire weapons, ply oars!
What am I? Where am I? What madness turns?                595
Unhappy Dido now your sinful deeds?
Then was the fitting time, when thou didst offer. and loyalty was not added to the right hand,
the provisions which they carry, the family house of a father,
who bore on their shoulders with age!
I could not have seized him, torn by the waves, and the body                600
and broadcast it? that shareholders do not wish to consume steel
Ascanian from hereditary banquet table?
But the issue of the fight, had been doubtful. in It:
which they are ready to be feared? fired his camp,
filled his decks with flames, blotted out his father,                605
with the whole race, and immolated myself on top of all.
The sun, whose rays survey all
too aware of these mediatress and Juno,
Hecate streets wailed by
, and the avenging Furies, and gods of dying Elissa,                610
ye this, and the evils of stoop to the least deserving
, and we will listen to our prayers. if it needs touch his haven
of weird over my head and the countries where it is necessary to swim to,
and in this manner they insisted upon the fates of Jupiter, the same is the terminus of a loss, it
in war by the daring man of the people, by the arms of,                615
the ends of the banished from their own, the complex was withdrawn Julius
for aid and see his friends cruelly
slaughtered! nor that, after he has submitted to the laws of an unjust peace,
the LORD hath given, of a kingdom or the pleasant light, enjoys it,
but perish before the day of lie unburied amid the sand.               620
I pray that these words out with blood.
Then do ye, O Tyrians, and all the race of the race of the future,
hate, dust offer this
tribute. there is no love, nor the people of the treaties, let them be.
Arise from my ashes if the avenger of                625
with fire and sword the Dardan settlers,
now, hereafter, whenever strength be given.
opposed to the shores of the beach, the waves, the waves,
I call, invoke, and the arms of his armor, fight themselves and children. ''

These things he said, and she turned her mind into every part of the district of,                630
, seeking to break off the light as soon as possible.
Then briefly she addressed Barce, nurse of Sychaeus,
for in her country of s black ashes held:
'Anne, a sister of my nurse, with, bring my sister:
tell the body to hasten as a poplar, and broadcast it in their streams,                635
and the sheep of his brother, and was shown to be propitiated and their guidance.
it happens, and you for the very honest, Lay out in the fillet.
Community glided to Jupiter, which is duly begun,
complete the intention is to put an end to cares
Trojan allow the pyre of flame. "               640
is answered. that the degree of the study to be celebrating with an old woman.
But trembling and her awful
rolling her bloodshot eyes, her trembling
and her cheeks and pale at the imminence of death,
the interiors of the house, climbs the high door posts, and                               645
, bound to the funeral pyres and she uncovers the
Trojan sword, a gift not sought for the use of the.
Here, the Trojan garb she spots
a little in tears and thought, she
lies on the bed and spoke the words:                650
'smooth, while the fortune and God,
take my soul and release cares.
I have lived and I have finished the course that Fortune gave;
and now in majesty my shade shall pass the earth.
famous city, I saw my walls,                655
my husband punishment from my brother,
happy, too happy, if only
Trjoan touched our shores. "
He said, the face on the couch 'die unavenged,
but let us die. So, I go into the dark.               660
drink in this fire with his eyes from the main
Trojan, and with him the omen of death. "
he had said, and in the middle of such things
having fallen on the companions see her, and the sword with the blood of
the foaming, and her hands stained. A scream to high                665
atrium and through the shaken city.
lamentations and groaning and feminine wailing
walls echoes loud wails
in no other way than if the enemy should rush with all
of Carthage or ancient Tire, and the raging flames                670
the summits of the roofs of men and of the gods.
, Heard, mind, terrified by the course of
her face with her nails and her breast with her fists
in the midst of this, he fell, the dying one by the name of the Socrates cries out:
"Was this what you were after? asking me fraudulently?               675
This pyre, the altar and fires?
What first lament? a sister company
rejected the dying? you had called me to the same fate,
the same pain and the same time would have brought both of them with the sword.
these it is also the country's pyre with these hands I called the                680
voice of the gods, so you placed cruel one?
You have destroyed me your sister and the people aged
Siodonian face. Date wounds with
water and, if any breath
mouth. " So saying she had escaped, and with high degrees of,                685
, throwing her, embraced in the bosom of the authentic and diligent in the care
with a groan and she dried the black blood with her clothes.
having tried to lift her heavy eyes, on the other hand
it is deficient; the wound and the wound stuck under her breast.
three times to lift her elbow,                690
thrice she rolled back on the couch with her eyes wandering on high has
sought the light found it, moaned.

Then omnipotent Juno having pitied the long grief
and her difficult death, sent Iris down from Olympus to
release her struggling soul and the limbs.               695
is that neither death nor by death,
but a sad day before the sudden frenzy,
yet had Proserpine hair
from her head the Oreo.
And so Iris, all dewy on saffron wings through the sky,                700
a thousand changing colors with the sun
, flies down and stood above her head. 'Dis, I take this
sacred ordered and I release you from this body set you free':
Thus he said, and to cuts the hair with her right, and at the same
, and dispersed, and the heat of the life vanished into the winds.               705